Ruff 0.8 release (#14486)
astral-sh/ruff: CHANGELOG.md

    Ruff now defaults to Python 3.9 instead of 3.8 if no explicit Python version is configured using [`ruff.target-version`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/settings/#target-version) or [`project.requires-python`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/#python-requires) ([#13896](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/13896))

- **Changed location of `pydoclint` diagnostics**

    [`pydoclint`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#pydoclint-doc) diagnostics now point to the first-line of the problematic docstring. Previously, this was not the case.

    If you've opted into these preview rules but have them suppressed using
    [`noqa`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/linter/#error-suppression) comments in
    some places, this change may mean that you need to move the `noqa` suppression
    comments. Most users should be unaffected by this change.

- **Use XDG (i.e. `~/.local/bin`) instead of the Cargo home directory in the standalone installer**

    Previously, Ruff's installer used `$CARGO_HOME` or `~/.cargo/bin` for its target install directory. Now, Ruff will be installed into `$XDG_BIN_HOME`, `$XDG_DATA_HOME/../bin`, or `~/.local/bin` (in that order).

>     This change is only relevant to users of the standalone Ruff installer (using the shell or PowerShell script). If you installed Ruff using `uv` or `pip`, you should be unaffected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This change is only relevant to users of the standalone Ruff installer (using the shell or PowerShell script). If you installed Ruff using uv or pip, you should be unaffected.
```

Reviewer: this _is_ the changelog ;-) see my other comment at https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14486#discussion_r1852343494

# Changelog

## 0.8.0

### Breaking changes

- Ruff 0.8 ([#14383](https://github.com/MichaReiser/ruff/pull/14383))

### Preview features

> - Mark UP043 fix unsafe when the type annotation contains any comments ([#14458](https://github.com/MichaReiser/ruff/pull/14458))

Author: Huh, why did it use my fork as remote

Reviewer: probably https://github.com/zanieb/rooster/issues/42?

# Changelog

## 0.8.0

Check out the [blog post](https://astral.sh/blog/ruff-v0.8.0) for a migration guide and overview of the changes!

### Breaking changes

See also, the "Remapped rules" section which may result in disabled rules.

- **Default to Python 3.9**

>     Ruff now defaults to Python 3.9 instead of 3.8 if no explicit Python version is configured using `ruff.target-version` or `project.requires-python` ([#13896](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/13896))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ruff now defaults to Python 3.9 instead of 3.8 if no explicit Python version is configured using [`ruff.target-version`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/settings/#target-version) or [`project.requires-python`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/#python-requires) ([#13896](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/13896))
```

- **Use XDG (i.e. `~/.local/bin`) instead of the Cargo home directory in the installer**

    Previously, Ruff's installer used `$CARGO_HOME` or `~/.cargo/bin` for its target install directory. Now, Ruff will be installed into `$XDG_BIN_HOME`, `$XDG_DATA_HOME/../bin`, or `~/.local/bin` (in that order). Note, this only applies if you installed Ruff with the standalone installer (using the shell or PowerShell script but not when using e.g. pip).

- **Updated Unicode standard**

>     Ruff now uses a more recent version of the Unicode standard. In very rare cases, this can lead to formatting changes or new `E501` violations if the computed line width differs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ruff now uses a more recent version of the Unicode standard. In very rare cases, this can lead to formatting changes or new [`E501`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/line-too-long/) violations if the computed line width differs.
```

### Removed Rules

The following deprecated rules have been removed:

- [`missing-type-self`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/missing-type-self/) (`ANN101`)
- [`missing-type-cls`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/missing-type-cls/) (`ANN102`)
- [`pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore/) (`E999`)
- [`pytest-missing-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-missing-fixture-name-underscore/) (`PT004`)
- [`pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore/) (`PT005`)
- [`unpacked-list-comprehension`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unpacked-list-comprehension/) (`UP027`)

### Remapped rules

> The following rules have been remapped to new rule codes:
> 
> - [`flake8-type-checking`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#flake8-type-checking-tch): `TCH` to `TC`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`flake8-type-checking`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#flake8-type-checking-tch) rules have been remapped to new rule codes: `TCH` to `TC`.
```

Author: I agree that the list feels a bit overkill but it's consistent with previous changelogs.

Author: I like the consistency because I commonly use previous changelogs as template for the next minor release. I also don't think it matters that much. It's a changelog

Reviewer: Interesting. I guess I weigh the usefulness as a template for the next version less strongly, as I usually find that I have to significantly edit the autogenerated changelog. But fair enough :-)

- [`fast-api-non-annotated-dependency`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/fast-api-non-annotated-dependency/) (`FAST002`)
- [`dict-index-missing-items`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/dict-index-missing-items/) (`PLC0206`)
- [`pep484-style-positional-only-argument`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pep484-style-positional-only-argument/) (`PYI063`)
- [`redundant-final-literal`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/redundant-final-literal/) (`PYI064`)
- [`bad-version-info-order`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/bad-version-info-order/) (`PYI066`)
- [`parenthesize-chained-operators`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/parenthesize-chained-operators/) (`RUF021`)
- [`unsorted-dunder-all`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unsorted-dunder-all/) (`RUF022`)
- [`unsorted-dunder-slots`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unsorted-dunder-slots/) (`RUF023`)
- [`assert-with-print-message`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/assert-with-print-message/) (`RUF030`)
- [`unnecessary-default-type-args`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unnecessary-default-type-args/) (`UP043`)

The following behaviors have been stabilized:

> - [`ambiguous-variable-name`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/ambiguous-variable-name/) (`E741`): Ignore violations in stub files because the stub-author doesn't control the variable name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`ambiguous-variable-name`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/ambiguous-variable-name/) (`E741`): Violations in stub files are now ignored. Stub authors typically don't control variable names.
```

> - [`invalid-pyproject-toml`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/invalid-pyproject-toml/) (`RUF200`): Updated to reflect the provisionally accepted PEP 639.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`invalid-pyproject-toml`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/invalid-pyproject-toml/) (`RUF200`): Updated to reflect the provisionally accepted [PEP 639](https://peps.python.org/pep-0639/).
```

> - [`printf-string-formatting`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/printf-string-formatting/) (`UP031`): Report all printf-like usages even if no autofix is available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`printf-string-formatting`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/printf-string-formatting/) (`UP031`): Report all `printf`-like usages even if no autofix is available
```

The following fixes have been stabilized:

- [`zip-instead-of-pairwise`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/zip-instead-of-pairwise/) (`RUF007`)

> ### Preview features

Reviewer: Could we possibly split this into two sections: new preview rules, and new features added to existing rules already in preview?

Reviewer: I'd just have two sections

```
### New preview rules

### Other preview changes
```

Author: That makes sense, but it only makes sense to me if we'll do this in all future releases.

Reviewer: I'm okay with that, personally

Author: I know haha, I don't know of a good way to automate it. We're labeling our issues too inconsistently.

Reviewer: I'm fine to leave it as you have it now :-) this probably comes down to me again feeling like this stage of the release process is already quite manual for me.

- \[`flake8-pyi`\] Add `redundant-none-literal` (`PYI061`) ([#14316](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14316))
- \[`flake8-pyi`\] Add autofix for `redundant-numeric-union` (`PYI041`) ([#14273](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14273))
- \[`pycodestyle`\] Exempt `pytest.importorskip()` calls (`E402`) ([#14474](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14474))

> - \[`pydoclint`\] Report pydoclint diagnostics at the start of the docstring instead of the documented statement ([#14381](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14381))

Reviewer: I keep debating in my head whether this deserves to be called out more prominently. On the one hand, it's quite a breaking change for people already opting into these rules. On the other hand, the rules are still in preview, so breaking changes are to be expected to some extent.

Author: Yeah, I might call it out at the top.

Author: Actually, it's not really a significant change. Most users should be unaffected because it is only relevant for cases where the pydoclint rule is suppressed with a `noqa` comment, because the suppression now is invalid.

Reviewer: > Looking at the ecosystem changes, there's just one RUF100 violation because of the changed location. Seems fine

We don't know for sure that the ecosystem corpus is representative of our users as a whole there -- there might be lots of users `noqa`ing pydoclint rules who aren't included in the ecosystem corpus. I would probably still call it out at the top, out of an abundance of caution. But I agree it's not too bad.

- \[`pylint`\] Autofix suggests using sets when possible (`PLR1714`) ([#14372](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14372))
- \[`ruff`\] New rule `map-int-version-parsing` (`RUF048`) ([#14373](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14373))
- \[`ruff`\] New rule `redundant-bool-literal` (`RUF038`) ([#14319](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14319))
- \[`ruff`\] New rule  `unraw-re-pattern` (`RUF039`) ([#14446](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14446))

### Rule changes

> - \[`flake8-datetimez`\] Exempt `min.time()` and `max.time()` (`DTZ901`) ([#14394](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14394))
> - \[`flake8-pie`\] Mark fix as unsafe if the following statement is a string literal (`PIE790`) ([#14393](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14393))
> - \[`flake8-pyi`\] Avoid panic in unfixable case (`PYI041`) ([#14402](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14402))
> - \[`flake8-type-checking`\] Correctly handle quotes in subscript expression when generating an autofix ([#14371](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14371))
> - \[`pylint`\] Fix incorrect autofix for `__contains__`  (`PLC2801`) ([#14424](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14424))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- \[`flake8-datetimez`\] Exempt `min.time()` and `max.time()` for `datetime-min-max` (`DTZ901`) ([#14394](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14394))
- \[`flake8-pie`\] Mark `unnecessary-placeholder` fix as unsafe if the following statement is a string literal (`PIE790`) ([#14393](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14393))
- \[`flake8-pyi`\] Avoid panic when `redundant-numeric-union` is unfixable (`PYI041`) ([#14402](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14402))
- \[`flake8-type-checking`\] Correctly handle quotes in subscript expressions when generating autofixes ([#14371](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14371))
- \[`pylint`\] Improve autofix for `__contains__` in `unnecessary-dunder-call` (`PLC2801`) ([#14424](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/14424))
```

Author: It makes the change log entries unnecessarily long, in my view. We already include the rule code, which is the main identifier used by users. I agree that it's currently somewhat inconsistent with some sections using rule names and others not. That's why I prefer keeping it as is.

Reviewer: OK!

- **Use XDG (i.e. `~/.local/bin`) instead of the Cargo home directory in the standalone installer**

    Previously, Ruff's installer used `$CARGO_HOME` or `~/.cargo/bin` for its target install directory. Now, Ruff will be installed into `$XDG_BIN_HOME`, `$XDG_DATA_HOME/../bin`, or `~/.local/bin` (in that order).
    
    This change is only relevant to users of the standalone Ruff installer (using the shell or PowerShell script). If you installed Ruff using `uv` or `pip`, you should be unaffected.

- **Updated Unicode standard**

    Ruff now uses a more recent version of the Unicode standard. In very rare cases, this can lead to formatting changes or new [`E501`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/line-too-long/) violations if the computed line width differs.

### Removed Rules

The following deprecated rules have been removed:

- [`missing-type-self`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/missing-type-self/) (`ANN101`)
- [`missing-type-cls`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/missing-type-cls/) (`ANN102`)

> - [`pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore/) (`E999`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore/) (`PT005`)
```

Reviewer: You had it right the first time! `E999` and `PT005` are both removed in this release, but `PT005` is already listed lower down. This bullet should cover `E999`

> - [`pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore/) (`E999`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`syntax-error`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/syntax-error/) (`E999`)
```

> - [`pytest-missing-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-missing-fixture-name-underscore/) (`PT004`)

Reviewer 2: Something doesn't look quite right here. `E999` is [syntax error](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/syntax-error/), but the rule referenced is `pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`, which is also duplicated.

- [`pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pytest-incorrect-fixture-name-underscore/) (`PT005`)
- [`unpacked-list-comprehension`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unpacked-list-comprehension/) (`UP027`)

### Remapped rules

The following rules have been remapped to new rule codes:

> - [`flake8-type-checking`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#flake8-type-checking-tch): `TCH` to `TC`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [`flake8-type-checking`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#flake8-type-checking-tc): `TCH` to `TC`
```
I assume the anchor in the docs is going to change once this is released.

Author: Good catch. We keep perma links for renamed rules but that probably doesn't apply to renamed categories.

- [`dict-index-missing-items`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/dict-index-missing-items/) (`PLC0206`)
- [`pep484-style-positional-only-argument`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/pep484-style-positional-only-argument/) (`PYI063`)
- [`redundant-final-literal`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/redundant-final-literal/) (`PYI064`)
- [`bad-version-info-order`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/bad-version-info-order/) (`PYI066`)
- [`parenthesize-chained-operators`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/parenthesize-chained-operators/) (`RUF021`)
- [`unsorted-dunder-all`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unsorted-dunder-all/) (`RUF022`)
- [`unsorted-dunder-slots`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unsorted-dunder-slots/) (`RUF023`)
- [`assert-with-print-message`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/assert-with-print-message/) (`RUF030`)
- [`unnecessary-default-type-args`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/unnecessary-default-type-args/) (`UP043`)

The following behaviors have been stabilized:

- [`ambiguous-variable-name`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/ambiguous-variable-name/) (`E741`): Violations in stub files are now ignored. Stub authors typically don't control variable names.

> - [`invalid-pyproject-toml`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/invalid-pyproject-toml/) (`RUF200`): Updated to reflect the provisionally accepted [PEP 639](https://peps.python.org/pep-0639/).

Reviewer: Reading this through again, I think this might be in the wrong section. This behaviour wasn't ever in `preview` (IIUC), so I don't think it counts as a "stabilisation"?

# Changelog

## 0.8.0

Check out the [blog post](https://astral.sh/blog/ruff-v0.8.0) for a migration guide and overview of the changes!

### Breaking changes

See also, the "Remapped rules" section which may result in disabled rules.

- **Default to Python 3.9**

>     Ruff now defaults to Python 3.9 instead of 3.8 if no explicit Python version is configured using [`ruff.target-version`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/settings/#target-version) or [`project.requires-python`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/#python-requires) ([#13896](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/13896))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ruff now assumes Python 3.9 by default instead of 3.8 if no explicit Python version is configured using [`ruff.target-version`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/settings/#target-version) or [`project.requires-python`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/#python-requires) ([#13896](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/13896))
```

Author: I prefer the simpler language of defaults

- **Changed location of `pydoclint` diagnostics**

>     The [`pydoclint`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#pydoclint-doc) diagnostics now point to the first-line of the problematic docstring. Previously, this was not the case.
> 
>     If you've opted into these rules but have them suppressed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [`pydoclint`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/#pydoclint-doc) diagnostics now point to the first-line of the problematic docstring. Previously, this was not the case.

    If you've opted into these preview rules but have them suppressed using
```

    [`noqa`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/linter/#error-suppression) comments in
    some places, this change may mean that you need to move the `noqa` suppression
    comments. Most users should be unaffected by this change.

- **Use XDG (i.e. `~/.local/bin`) instead of the Cargo home directory in the standalone installer**

    Previously, Ruff's installer used `$CARGO_HOME` or `~/.cargo/bin` for its target install directory. Now, Ruff will be installed into `$XDG_BIN_HOME`, `$XDG_DATA_HOME/../bin`, or `~/.local/bin` (in that order).

    This change is only relevant to users of the standalone Ruff installer (using the shell or PowerShell script). If you installed Ruff using `uv` or `pip`, you should be unaffected.

- **Changes to the line width calculation**

>     Ruff now uses a new version of the [unicode-width](https://github.com/unicode-rs/unicode-width) Rust crate to calculate the line width. In very rare cases, this can lead to lines containing Unicode characters to get reformatted, or be considered too long ([`E501`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/line-too-long/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ruff now uses a new version of the [unicode-width](https://github.com/unicode-rs/unicode-width) Rust crate to calculate the line width. In very rare cases, this may lead to lines containing Unicode characters being reformatted, or being considered too long when they were not before ([`E501`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/line-too-long/)).
```
